Doc 5297 (#530)
couchbase/docs-server: modules/manage/pages/manage-security/configure-ldap.adoc

Couchbase Server can be configured to authenticate the external user by means of LDAP; and to map the LDAP _groups_ of which the user is a member to roles defined on Couchbase Server.

[#understanding-ldap-authentication]
== Understanding LDAP Authentication and Authorization

For authentication purposes, Couchbase Server can be configured to use LDAP.

> This allows users, when they attempt to access Couchbase Server by presenting their credentials, to be authenticated by LDAP.

Reviewer: I think we need to add 2 more things here:
1. Add more details on how authentication is done. First of username specified by the user is mapped to LDAP distinguished name (which can be done either by using a template or by performing an LDAP search). Then Couchbase-Server tries to authenticate the user using the DN from first step and password that is provided by the user; 
2. How users get roles after authentication. Something like this (please rephrase): After authentication users are granted with roles that were assigned to corresponding "external" users in Couchbase-Server.

Author: I've modified throughout.

Optionally, LDAP _group_ information for the authenticated user can be fetched from the LDAP server.

> Each LDAP group can be mapped to a Couchbase-Server group, whose assigned roles are thereby granted to the user.

Reviewer: I suggest we add the following, since it's important feature (please rephrase if needed):
In this case if there is no extra roles needs to be assigned to the user directly there is no need to create the user in Couchbase Server. The user will authenticate on LDAP server "transparently" and get roles via "ldap groups to couchbase groups" mapping.

Author: I have modified this throughout.

image::manage-security/ldapAndGroupsTabs.png[,200,align=left]

The *LDAP* tab allows an LDAP server to be specified for external authentication.
The *Groups* tab allows definition of _Couchbase-Server user-groups_, which are to be associated with _LDAP groups_, and which can be assigned Couchbase-Server _roles_.

> The *ADD USER* tab allows individual users to be added, and for their authentication to be specified as *external*; allowing their LDAP group-membership to be mapped to one or more Couchbase-Server user-groups and their assigned roles.

Reviewer: Phrase "allowing their LDAP group-membership to be mapped to one or more Couchbase-Server user-groups and their assigned roles." looks a bit incorrect to me.
"external" users don't allow LDAP group-membership to be mapped to anything. The only purpose of the "external" users is to assign roles to them. If we assign roles to "ldap" groups (by mapping them to CB groups) we might not need "external" users at all. We might want to have both, though, in sense that user can get some roles from ldap groups and some directly assigned to corresponding "external" user. Let me know if it sounds confusing.

Author: I think I understand this now, and have modified throughout.

[#left-click-on-ldap-tab]
image::manage-security/leftClickOnLdapTab.png[,70,align=left]

This brings up the *LDAP Configuration* dialog:

[#configure-ldap-dialog]
image::manage-security/configureLDAP.png[,420,align=left]

The dialog presents two main panels.
The left panel features options whereby LDAP can be configured.
The right panel features help text, for *LDAP Host Configuration*, *User Authentication*, and *Group Authorization*.

Initially, the left panel displays the following fields:

* *LDAP Host(s)*. A comma-separated list of host-names, each of which is an LDAP server on which external authentication can occur.
The first accessible server in the list is the one that is used.

> For example, if the list is `server1, server2`, provided that `server1` is accessible, it is used.)

Reviewer: Typo: parentheses at the end is needless

Author: Thanks.

* *Certificate Validation*. Whether to validate Couchbase Server with the server certificate.
This set of radio-buttons is enabled only if *TLS* or *StartTLSExtension* has been selected from the *Encryption* pull-down menu.
+
The options are *None*, *Couchbase*, and *Paste Cert*.
If *None* is selected, no certificate validation occurs: this option is insecure, and therefore _not_ recommended.
+
If *Couchbase* is selected, the certificate already installed for the cluster is used for validation.
(See xref:learn:security/certificates.adoc[Certificates] for information.)
If *Paste Cert* is selected, the panel expands vertically, to reveal the *Certificate Text* field:
+
[#certificate-text-field]
image::manage-security/certificateTextField.png[,400,align=left]
+
The text of the appropriate certificate should be copied and pasted, in PEM format, into the *Certificate Text* field.

* *Contact LDAP host anonymously*.
Checking this checkbox causes Couchbase Server to attempt to contact the LDAP host anonymously.

> However, the attempt succeeds only if supported by the LDAP configuration.

Reviewer: I would say "if supported by the LDAP server" to not confuse it with the LDAP configuration that is described in this document

Author: Thanks, fixed.

Optionally, the *Check Network Settings* button can now be left-clicked on.
This tests whether the specified LDAP hosts are accessible across the network.
If none of the servers is accessible, an error is displayed on the dialog.

> The dialog provides the following additional controls, for editing and deleting the group:

Reviewer: Not sure what you mean. We are not editing and deleting groups here.

Author: Typo, fixed. Thanks.

[#configure-ldap-dialog-enable-ldap-user-auth-field]
image::manage-security/configureLdapEnableLdapUserAuthField.png[,400,align=left]
+
This provides three options whereby usernames can be mapped to LDAP distinguished names (https://ldap.com/ldap-dns-and-rdns/[DN^]).
The default option is *Template*.
An appropriate mapping should be entered into the *Template* editable text field: this avoids the need to request the LDAP server to provide the username-to-DN mapping.

> The required format is indicated by the placeholder text, within the field.

Reviewer: Format is described in RFC 4514 (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4514).

Author: I have added the link.

The `%u` is replaced by the username used at login.
+

> For example, based on the placeholder, if the user logs in as `exampleUser`, the user is mapped to the DN `cn=exampleUser,dc=example,dc=com`.

Reviewer: in placeholder the different template is shown. Correct example: if template is "cn=%u,dc=example,dc=com" and user logs in as `exampleUser`, the user is mapped to the DN `cn=exampleUser,dc=example,dc=com`

Author: I have modified as described.

+
Each of the other options, *LDAP query* and *Custom*, likewise provides a vertical expansion of the dialog, to accommodate entry of an appropriate mapping-procedure.
Selecting *LDAP query* displays the following:
+
image::manage-security/ldapQuery.png[,400,align=left]
+
Couchbase server performs the specified LDAP https://ldap.com/the-ldap-search-operation/[search operation] to get the user's DN from LDAP server.
*Base* is the _search base_ https://ldap.com/the-ldap-search-operation/[DN].
*Filter* is the https://ldap.com/the-ldap-search-operation/[search filter].

> Search scope is always `one`; and `%u` is replaced with the username that was used by the current administrator to log into Couchbase Web Console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Search scope is always `one`; and `%u` is replaced by the username used at login.
```

Author: Changed.

For example, if *Base* is specified as `ou=users,dc=example,dc=com`, *Filter* as `(uid=%u)`, and the username is `exampleUser`, Couchbase Server performs the following search, in order to obtain the user's DN: `ou=users,dc=example,dc=com??one?(uid=exampleUser)`.
+
Selecting *Custom* displays the following;
+
image::manage-security/custom.png[,400,align=left]
+
This option allows a custom rule-set to be provided.
The rules are used for mapping usernames to LDAP DNs, and must be expressed using the following JSON format:
+
image::manage-security/jsonSearchSyntax.png[,400,align=left]
+
These rules, expressed sequentially, are applied one by one, until one of the regular expressions matches.
When a match is achieved, the specified query or template is used to retrieve the user's DN.
+

> If no match is found, the assumes the username employed by the administrator at Couchbase-Server login to be the DN (in other words, the administrator logged in with a username such as `cn=exampleUser,dc=example,dc=com`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no match is found, the Couchbase Server assumes the username employed by the administrator at Couchbase-Server login to be the DN (in other words, the administrator logged in with a username such as `cn=exampleUser,dc=example,dc=com`.
```

It sounds to me like you are talking about the administrator who is configuring LDAP here. If so, it's not correct. Who actually we are talking about here are the future users that will use ldap to log in the system. Their usernames will be treated as DN's. Please let me know if it doesn't make any sense.

Author: I think I understand. I have changed to:

If no match is found, Couchbase Server assumes that the DN is the username presented to Couchbase Server by the user who is attempting to gain access (in other words, assumes that a username such as `cn=exampleUser,dc=example,dc=com` has been presented).

Couchbase Server maps the specified username to an LDAP DN, and performs authentication on the LDAP server.
Notifications confirming success or failure duly appear on the dialog.

[#enable-ldap-group-authorization]
* *Enable LDAP group authorization & sync*.
Switch on, to enable.
This expands the dialog vertically, as follows:
+
[#configure-dialog-test-groups-query]
image::manage-security/configureLDAPgroupsPanel.png[,400,align=left]
+
The LDAP groups of which a user is a member can be searched for by means of either the *User's attributes* or an *LDAP Query*, each of which is provided as a radio-button option.
Selection of each reveals a corresponding set of fields, in which information can be added:

** *User's attributes*.
Selected by default, this instructs Couchbase Server to assume that each LDAP user-record contains an attribute featuring the list of groups of which the user is a member.
Couchbase Server therefore performs the following LDAP search: `<userDN>?<attribute>?one`.
+
The value of the specified `attribute` is treated as a list of groups.
For example, if `attribute` is set to `memberOf`,

> Couchbase Server perform the following search for the specified user's groups:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Couchbase Server performs the following search for the specified user's groups:
```

Author: Thanks, fixed.

If the username `myuser` is specified, a match is made on the regular expression provided by the _second rule_: therefore, the template `cn&#61;&#x007B;0&#x007D;,ou&#61;users,dc&#61;example,dc&#61;com` is used to retrieve the DN.

[#testing-user-authentication]
==== Testing User Authentication

*Test User Authentication*, when opened, provides options for testing the authentication of specific users:

[#test-user-auth-field]
image::manage-security/testUserAuth.png[,400,align=left]

Enter the username and password for the user, and left-click on *Test User Authentication*.
Couchbase Server maps the specified username to an LDAP DN, and performs authentication on the LDAP server.
Notifications confirming success or failure duly appear on the dialog.

[#enable-ldap-group-authorization]
[#group-authorization-enablement]
=== Group Authorization Enablement

Fields for enabling _LDAP Group Support_ are made visible by means of the *Enable LDAP group authorization & sync* switch.

> Enablement means that Couchbase Server retrieves from the *LDAP Hosts(s)* all _LDAP group membership_ information for users that the *LDAP Host(s)* authenticate.

Reviewer: Couchbase Server doesn't retrieve all LDAP group membership info. We retrieve group membership info on per user basis only when authorization for this particular is being done (I think it can be called "on-demand").

Author: I have changed it to:

Enablement means that when a user has been authenticated by the *LDAP Hosts(s)*, Couchbase Server retrieves the _LDAP group membership_ information for that user, in order to authorize them.

The value of the specified `attribute` is treated as a list of groups.
For example, if `attribute` is set to `memberOf`,
Couchbase Server performs the following search for the specified user's groups:
`uid=exampleUser,dc=example,dc=com?memberOf?one`.

[#ldap-query-group]
==== LDAP Query

When the *LDAP Query* radio-button is selected, the *Query for Groups Using* panel appears as follows:

image::manage-security/ldapConfigurationLDAPquery.png[,400,align=left]

Selection of *LDAP Query* instructs Couchbase Server to perform an LDAP search, in order to retrieve a list of the user's groups.
For explanations of *Base*, *Filter*, *Scope*, see https://ldap.com/the-ldap-search-operation/[The LDAP Search Operation^].
When the search is conducted, `%u` is replaced with the specified username; and
`%D` is replaced with the user's DN.

For example, *Base* might be specified as `ou=groups,dc=example,dc=com`, *Filter* as `(member=%D)`, and *Scope* as `one`:

image::manage-security/ldapQueryDetail.png[,320,align=left]

[#traverse-nested-groups]
==== Traverse Nested Groups

The *Traverse nested groups* checkbox, when checked, allows nested groups to be traversed by the search.

> Couchbase Server uses the same search to find groups of groups recursively (with each group's DN being substituted for `%D`).

Reviewer: Not sure if it is clear here that we are talking about the search that is described above ('User's Attributes' or 'LDAP Query'). Maybe we need to rephrase. If you are sure that it's clear enough, let's keep it.

Author: So, what I've done is include this information for the first subject, User's Attributes; then create pointers back to that information, from the second subject, LDAP Query. Is there any difference in the way things are applied? If so, I should write a separate section for each.

Alternatively, left-click on *Cancel* to abandon the configuration procedure.

[#map-ldap-groups-to-couchbase-server-roles]
=== Map LDAP Groups to Couchbase-Server Roles

> To map an LDAP group to a Couchbase-Server role, you must first create a Couchbase-Server user-group; then associate this user-group with an LDAP group; and finally, assign roles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To map an LDAP group to Couchbase-Server roles, you must first create a Couchbase-Server user-group; then associate this user-group with an LDAP group; and finally, assign roles.
```

Author: Fixed.

To display the _groups_ view, left-click on the *Groups* tab, towards the upper right:

image::manage-security/usersAndGroupsSelectGroups.png[,120,align=middle]

This brings up the _groups_ view, which shows currently defined user-groups for the cluster.

image::manage-security/usersAndGroupsGroupsView.png[,800,align=middle]

This confirms the existence of the user-group `Admins`.

Now, left-click on the row displayed for this group.
The row expands vertically, and exposes additional controls:

image::manage-security/expandedGroupRow.png[,800,align=middle]

Left-click on the *Edit* button, at the lower right:

image::manage-security/editGroupRowButton.png[,180,align=middle]

This brings up the *Edit Group Admins* dialog:

image::manage-security/editGroupAdmins.png[,420,align=middle]

Within this dialog, the description, mapping, or roles for the group can be edited.
For details of selecting roles within the *Roles* panel, see xref:manage:manage-security/manage-users-and-roles.adoc[Manage Users and Roles].

[#adding-an-externally-authenticated-user]
=== Adding an Externally Authenticated User

> Couchbase-Server users can be specified as _externally authenticated_, when they are added to the system.

Reviewer: I would also add here that authentication does not require creation of "external" users and the whole point of doing that is to assign roles to ldap users. If this is not needed (users get roles via ldap groups), it's not required to create "external" users in Couchbase Server. 

There are three ways to assign roles to an ldap user:
1) Directly, in add/edit user dialog (admin needs to create "external" user);
2) Add manually to Couchbase user-group (admin needs to create "external" user and add it to user-group) (Tony, please note that ldap groups are not needed for this option);
3) Using ldap groups, no need to create "external" user in this case. LDAP groups are retrieved from LDAP server. Then they are mapped to Couchbase user-groups, so there is no need in creation of "external" user in Couchbase Server.

Author: I haven't added it here explicitly, but have modified the passage, and I've added it elsewhere, particularly in the overview. See what you think.

> If an LDAP group-mapping has been defined, externally authenticated users can also be recognized as members of one or more corresponding Couchbase-Server user-groups, and thereby assigned the appropriate privileges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an LDAP group-mapping has been defined, externally authenticated users can also be recognized as members of one or more corresponding Couchbase-Server user-groups, and thereby assigned the appropriate privileges.
```
Yes, but as I explained above it works even without creation of "external" users. Probably need to rephrase or remove.

image::manage-security/editGroupAdmins.png[,420,align=middle]

Within this dialog, the description, mapping, or roles for the group can be edited.
For details of selecting roles within the *Roles* panel, see xref:manage:manage-security/manage-users-and-roles.adoc[Manage Users, Groups, and Roles].

Note that if the *Delete Group* button is left-clicked on, the group is deleted.
This means that all mappings between LDAP groups and the roles that were assigned to this group are also deleted.

> However, if users registered on Couchbase Server as either _local_ or xref:manage:manage-security/configure-ldap.adoc#adding-an-externally-authenticated-user[external] were allocated roles by means of this group, the deletion of this group causes those users to be individually assigned the roles they previously held through membership of the group; and consequently, the users retain their privileges.

Reviewer: As we discussed in slack, this sentence should be modified or removed

Author: I've removed.

[#configure-ldap-with-the-rest-api]
== Configure LDAP with the REST API

To configure an LDAP server to be used as a source of authentication for Couchbase Server, use the `/settings/ldap` endpoint, as follows:

----
curl -v -X POST -u Administrator:password \
http://10.143.192.101:8091/settings/ldap \
-d hosts=172.23.124.25 \
-d port=389 \
-d encryption=StartTLSExtension \
-d server_cert_validation=true \
--data-urlencode cacert@/path/to/cert \
-d query_dn='cn=admin,dc=example,dc=com' \
-d query_pass=password \
-d authentication_enabled=true \
--data-urlencode user_dn_mapping='[{"re":"(.+)","template":"uid={0},ou=users,dc=example,dc=com"}]' \
-d authorization_enabled=true \
--data-urlencode groups_query='ou=groups,dc=example,dc=com??one?(member=%D)'

----

This call references the LDAP server at `172.23.125.25`, on port `389`, enabling authorization and authentication for user-credentials to be passed from Couchbase Server.

For more information, see xref:rest-api:rest-configure-ldap.adoc[Configure LDAP].

[#map-groups-with-the-rest-api]
=== Map Groups with the REST API

> Use the `PUT /settings/rbac/groups/admins` method and URI, as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `PUT /settings/rbac/groups/<GroupName>` method and URI, as follows:
```

Author: Thanks, fixed.
